# A Guided Tour {#a-guided-tour data-type=chapter}

This chapter gives an overview of OCaml by walking through a series of small
examples that cover most of the major features of the language. This should
provide a sense of what OCaml can do, without getting too deep into any one
topic.

Throughout the book we're going to use `Base`, a more full-featured and
capable replacement for OCaml's standard library. We'll also use `utop`, a
shell that lets you type in expressions and evaluate them interactively.
`utop` is an easier-to-use version of OCaml's standard toplevel (which you
can start by typing *ocaml* at the command line). These instructions will
assume you're using `utop`, but the ordinary toplevel should mostly work
fine.

::: {data-type=note}
## `Base`, `Core` and `Core_kernel`

`Base` is one of a family of three standard library replacements, each with
different use-cases, each building on the last. Here's a quick summary.

- *`Base`* is designed to provide the fundamentals needed from a standard
  library. It has a variety of basic efficient data structures like
  hash-tables, sets and sequences. It also defines the basic idioms for error
  handling and serialization, and contains well organized APIs for every
  basic data type from integers to lazy values. This is comes along with a
  minimum of external dependencies, so `Base` just takes seconds to build and
  install. It's also portable, running on every platform that OCaml does,
  including Windows and JavaScript.

- *`Core_kernel`* extends `Base` with many new data structures, like heaps,
  and other capabilities, like types to represent times and time-zones, and
  support for efficient binary serializers. It's still portable, but has many
  more dependencies, takes longer to build, and will add more to the size of
  your executables.

- *`Core`* is the most full-featured, extending `Core_kernel` with support
  for a variety of UNIX APIs, but only works on UNIX-like OSs, including
  Linux and macOS.

We use `Base` in this section, but you should check out `Core` and
`Core_kernel`, depending on your requirements. We'll discuss some of the
additional functionality provided by `Core` and `Core_kernel` later in the
book.
:::


Before getting started, make sure you have a working OCaml installation so
you can try out the examples as you read through the chapter.

## OCaml as a Calculator {#ocaml-as-a-calculator data-type=sect1}

Our first step is to open `Base`: [OCaml/numerical calculations
in]{.idx}[numerical calculations]{.idx}[Core standard library/opening]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="0.5" />

By opening `Base`, we make the definitions it contains available without
having to reference `Base` explicitly. This is required for many of the
examples in the tour and in the remainder of the book.

Now let's try a few simple numerical calculations:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="1" />

By and large, this is pretty similar to what you'd find in any programming
language, but a few things jump right out at you:

- We needed to type `;;` in order to tell the toplevel that it should
  evaluate an expression. This is a peculiarity of the toplevel that is not
  required in standalone programs (though it is sometimes helpful to include
  `;;` to improve OCaml's error reporting, by making it more explicit where a
  given top-level declaration was intended to end).

- After evaluating an expression, the toplevel first prints the type of the
  result, and then prints the result itself.

- Function arguments are separated by spaces instead of by parentheses and
  commas, which is more like the UNIX shell than it is like traditional
  programming languages such as C or Java.

- OCaml allows you to place underscores in the middle of numeric literals to
  improve readability. Note that underscores can be placed anywhere within a
  number, not just every three digits.

- OCaml carefully distinguishes between `float`, the type for floating-point
  numbers, and `int`, the type for integers. The types have different
  literals (`6.` instead of `6`) and different infix operators (`+.` instead
  of `+`), and OCaml doesn't automatically cast between these types. This can
  be a bit of a nuisance, but it has its benefits, since it prevents some
  kinds of bugs that arise in other languages due to unexpected differences
  between the behavior of `int` and `float`. For example, in many languages,
  `1 / 3` is zero, but `1 / 3.0` is a third. OCaml requires you to be
  explicit about which operation you're using.

We can also create a variable to name the value of a given expression, using
the `let` keyword. This is known as a *let binding*:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="2" />

After a new variable is created, the toplevel tells us the name of the
variable (`x` or `y`), in addition to its type (`int`) and value (`7` or
`14`).

Note that there are some constraints on what identifiers can be used for
variable names. Punctuation is excluded, except for `_` and `'`, and
variables must start with a lowercase letter or an underscore. Thus, these
are legal:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="3" />

The following examples, however, are not legal:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="4" />

This highlights that variables can't be capitalized, can't begin with
numbers, and can't contain dashes.

## Functions and Type Inference {#functions-and-type-inference data-type=sect1}

The `let` syntax can also be used to define a function:[let syntax/function
definition with]{.idx}[functions/defining]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="5" />

Functions in OCaml are values like any other, which is why we use the
`let` keyword to bind a function to a variable name, just as we use `let` to
bind a simple value like an integer to a variable name. When using `let` to
define a function, the first identifier after the `let` is the function name,
and each subsequent identifier is a different argument to the function. Thus,
`square` is a function with a single argument.

Now that we're creating more interesting values like functions, the types
have gotten more interesting too. `int -> int` is a function type, in this
case indicating a function that takes an `int` and returns an `int`. We can
also write functions that take multiple arguments. (Reminder: Don't forget
`open Base`, or these examples won't work!) [multi-argument
functions]{.idx}[functions/with multiple arguments]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="6" />

The preceding example also happens to be our first use of modules. Here,
`Float.of_int` refers to the `of_int` function contained in the `Float`
module. This is different from what you might expect from an object-oriented
language, where dot-notation is typically used for accessing a method of an
object. Note that module names always start with a capital letter.

Modules can also be opened to make their contents available without
explicitly qualifying by the module name. We did that once already, when we
opened `Base` earlier. We can use that to make this code a little easier to
read, both avoiding the repetition of `Float` above, and avoiding use of the
slightly awkward `/.` operator. In the following example, we open the
`Float.O` module, which has a bunch of useful operators and functions that
are designed to be used in this kind of context. Note that this causes the
standard int-only arithmetic operators to be shadowed locally.

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="6.1" />

Note that we used a slightly different syntax for opening the module, since
we were only opening it in the local scope inside the definition of `ratio`.
There's also a more concise syntax for local opens, as you can see here.

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="6.2" />

The notation for the type-signature of a multiargument function may be a
little surprising at first, but we'll explain where it comes from when we get
to function currying in
[Multi Argument Functions](variables-and-functions.html#multi-argument-functions){data-type=xref}.
For the moment, think of the arrows as separating different arguments of the
function, with the type after the final arrow being the return value. Thus,
`int -> int -> float` describes a function that takes two `int` arguments and
returns a `float`.

We can also write functions that take other functions as arguments. Here's an
example of a function that takes three arguments: a test function and two
integer arguments. The function returns the sum of the integers that pass the
test:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="7" />

If we look at the inferred type signature in detail, we see that the first
argument is a function that takes an integer and returns a boolean, and that
the remaining two arguments are integers. Here's an example of this function
in action:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="8" />

Note that in the definition of `even`, we used `=` in two different ways:
once as part of the `let` binding that separates the thing being defined from
its definition; and once as an equality test, when comparing `x % 2` to
`0`. These are very different operations despite the fact that they share
some syntax.

### Type Inference {#type-inference data-type=sect2}

As the types we encounter get more complicated, you might ask yourself how
OCaml is able to figure them out, given that we didn't write down any
explicit type information.[type inference/process of]{.idx}

OCaml determines the type of an expression using a technique called
*type inference*, by which the type of an expression is inferred from the
available type information about the components of that expression.

As an example, let's walk through the process of inferring the type of
`sum_if_true`:

1. OCaml requires that both branches of an `if` statement have the same type,
   so the expression

   `if test first then first else 0`

   requires that `first` must be the same type as `0`, and so `first` must be
   of type `int`. Similarly, from

   `if test second then second else 0`

   we can infer that `second` has type `int`.

2. `test` is passed `first` as an argument. Since `first` has type `int`, the
   input type of `test` must be `int`.

3. `test first` is used as the condition in an `if` statement, so the return
   type of `test` must be `bool`.

4. The fact that `+` returns `int` implies that the return value of
   `sum_if_true` must be int.

Together, that nails down the types of all the variables, which determines
the overall type of `sum_if_true`.

Over time, you'll build a rough intuition for how the OCaml inference engine
works, which makes it easier to reason through your programs. You can also
make it easier to understand the types of a given expression by adding
explicit type annotations. These annotations don't change the behavior of an
OCaml program, but they can serve as useful documentation, as well as catch
unintended type changes. They can also be helpful in figuring out why a given
piece of code fails to compile.

Here's an annotated version of `sum_if_true`:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="9" />

In the above, we've marked every argument to the function with its type, with
the final annotation indicating the type of the return value. Such type
annotations can be placed on any expression in an OCaml program:

### Inferring Generic Types {#inferring-generic-types data-type=sect2}

Sometimes, there isn't enough information to fully determine the concrete
type of a given value. Consider this function..[type inference/generic
types]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="10" />

`first_if_true` takes as its arguments a function `test`, and two values,
`x` and `y`, where `x` is to be returned if `test x` evaluates to `true`, and
`y` otherwise. So what's the type of the `x` argument to `first_if_true`?
There are no obvious clues such as arithmetic operators or literals to narrow
it down. That makes it seem like `first_if_true` would work on values of any
type.

Indeed, if we look at the type returned by the toplevel, we see that rather
than choose a single concrete type, OCaml has introduced a
*type variable*`'a` to express that the type is generic. (You can tell it's a
type variable by the leading single quote mark.) In particular, the type of
the `test` argument is `('a -> bool)`, which means that `test` is a
one-argument function whose return value is `bool` and whose argument could
be of any type `'a`. But, whatever type `'a` is, it has to be the same as the
type of the other two arguments, `x` and `y`, and of the return value of
`first_if_true`. This kind of genericity is called *parametric polymorphism*
because it works by parameterizing the type in question with a type variable.
It is very similar to generics in C# and Java. [parametric
polymorphism]{.idx}[type variables]{.idx}

Because the type of `first_if_true` is generic, we can write this:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="11" />

As well as this:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="12" />

Both `long_string` and `big_number` are functions, and each is passed to
`first_if_true` with two other arguments of the appropriate type (strings in
the first example, and integers in the second). But we can't mix and match
two different concrete types for `'a` in the same use of `first_if_true`:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="13" />

In this example, `big_number` requires that `'a` be instantiated as `int`,
whereas `"short"` and `"loooooong"` require that `'a` be instantiated as
`string`, and they can't both be right at the same time.

::: {data-type=note}
#### Type Errors Versus Exceptions

There's a big difference in OCaml (and really in any compiled language)
between errors that are caught at compile time and those that are caught at
runtime. It's better to catch errors as early as possible in the development
process, and compilation time is best of all.[runtime exceptions vs. type
errors]{.idx}[errors/runtime vs. compile time]{.idx}[exceptions/vs. type
errors]{.idx}[type errors vs. exceptions]{.idx}

Working in the toplevel somewhat obscures the difference between runtime and
compile-time errors, but that difference is still there. Generally, type
errors like this one:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="14" />

are compile-time errors (because `+` requires that both its arguments be of
type `int`), whereas errors that can't be caught by the type system, like
division by zero, lead to runtime exceptions:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="15" />

The distinction here is that type errors will stop you whether or not the
offending code is ever actually executed. Merely defining `add_potato` is an
error, whereas `is_a_multiple` only fails when it's called, and then, only
when it's called with an input that triggers the exception.
:::



## Tuples, Lists, Options, and Pattern Matching {#tuples-lists-options-and-pattern-matching data-type=sect1}

### Tuples {#tuples data-type=sect2}

So far we've encountered a handful of basic types like `int`, `float`, and
`string`, as well as function types like `string -> int`. But we haven't yet
talked about any data structures. We'll start by looking at a particularly
simple data structure, the tuple. A tuple is an ordered collection of values
that can each be of a different type. You can create a tuple by joining
values together with a comma. [tuples]{.idx}[data structures/tuples]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="16" />

(For the mathematically inclined, `*` is used in the type `t * s` because
that type corresponds to the set of all pairs containing one value of type
`t` and one of type `s`. In other words, it's the *Cartesian product* of the
two types, which is why we use ` * `, the symbol for product.)

You can extract the components of a tuple using OCaml's pattern-matching
syntax, as shown below:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="17" />

Here, the `(x,y)` on the left-hand side of the `let` binding is the pattern.
This pattern lets us mint the new variables `x` and `y`, each bound to
different components of the value being matched. These can now be used in
subsequent expressions:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="18" />

Note that the same syntax is used both for constructing and for pattern
matching on tuples.

Pattern matching can also show up in function arguments. Here's a function
for computing the distance between two points on the plane, where each point
is represented as a pair of `float`s. The pattern-matching syntax lets us get
at the values we need with a minimum of fuss:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="19" />

The `**.` operator used above is for raising a floating-point number to a
power.

This is just a first taste of pattern matching. Pattern matching is a
pervasive tool in OCaml, and as you'll see, it has surprising power.

### Lists {#lists data-type=sect2}

Where tuples let you combine a fixed number of items, potentially of
different types, lists let you hold any number of items of the same type.
Consider the following example:[data structures/lists]{.idx #DSlists}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="20" />

Note that you can't mix elements of different types in the same list, unlike
tuples:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="21" />

#### The List module {#the-list-module data-type=sect3}

`Base` comes with a `List` module that has a rich collection of functions for
working with lists. We can access values from within a module by using dot
notation. For example, this is how we compute the length of a list:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="22" />

Here's something a little more complicated. We can compute the list of the
lengths of each language as follows:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="23" />

`List.map` takes two arguments: a list and a function for transforming the
elements of that list. It returns a new list with the transformed elements
and does not modify the original list.

Notably, the function passed to `List.map` is passed under a
*labeled argument*`~f`. Labeled arguments are specified by name rather than
by position, and thus allow you to change the order in which arguments are
presented to a function without changing its behavior, as you can see
here:[arguments/labeled arguments]{.idx}[labeled arguments]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="24" />

We'll learn more about labeled arguments and why they're important in
[Variables And Functions](variables-and-functions.html#variables-and-functions){data-type=xref}.

#### Constructing lists with :: {#constructing-lists-with data-type=sect3}

In addition to constructing lists using brackets, we can use the list
constructor `::` for adding elements to the front of a list:[operators/: :
operator]{.idx}[lists/operator : :]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="25" />

Here, we're creating a new and extended list, not changing the list we
started with, as you can see below:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="26" />

::: {data-type=note}
##### Semicolons Versus Commas

Unlike many other languages, OCaml uses semicolons to separate list elements
in lists rather than commas. Commas, instead, are used for separating
elements in a tuple. If you try to use commas in a list, you'll see that your
code compiles but doesn't do quite what you might expect:[commas vs.
semicolons]{.idx}[semicolons vs. commas]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="27" />

In particular, rather than a list of three strings, what we have is a
singleton list containing a three-tuple of strings.

This example uncovers the fact that commas create a tuple, even if there are
no surrounding parens. So, we can write:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="28" />

to allocate a tuple of integers. This is generally considered poor style and
should be avoided.
:::


The bracket notation for lists is really just syntactic sugar for `::`. Thus,
the following declarations are all equivalent. Note that `[]` is used to
represent the empty list and that `::` is right-associative:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="29" />

The `::` constructor can only be used for adding one element to the front of
the list, with the list terminating at `[]`, the empty list. There's also a
list concatenation operator, `@`, which can concatenate two lists:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="30" />

It's important to remember that, unlike `::`, this is not a constant-time
operation. Concatenating two lists takes time proportional to the length of
the first list.

#### List patterns using match {#list-patterns-using-match data-type=sect3}

The elements of a list can be accessed through pattern matching. List
patterns are based on the two list constructors, `[]` and `::`. Here's a
simple example:[pattern matching/in lists]{.idx}[lists/pattern
matching]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="31" />

By pattern matching using `::`, we've isolated and named the first element of
the list (`my_favorite`) and the remainder of the list (`the_rest`). If you
know Lisp or Scheme, what we've done is the equivalent of using the functions
`car` and `cdr` to isolate the first element of a list and the remainder of
that list.

As you can see, however, the toplevel did not like this definition and spit
out a warning indicating that the pattern is not exhaustive. This means that
there are values of the type in question that won't be captured by the
pattern. The warning even gives an example of a value that doesn't match the
provided pattern, in particular, `[]`, the empty list. If we try to run
`my_favorite_language`, we'll see that it works on nonempty lists and fails
on empty ones:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="32" />

You can avoid these warnings, and more importantly make sure that your code
actually handles all of the possible cases, by using a `match` statement
instead.

A `match` statement is a kind of juiced-up version of the `switch` statement
found in C and Java. It essentially lets you list a sequence of patterns,
separated by pipe characters. (The one before the first case is optional.)
The compiler then dispatches to the code following the first matching
pattern. As we've already seen, the pattern can mint new variables that
correspond to parts of the value being matched.

Here's a new version of `my_favorite_language` that uses `match` and doesn't
trigger a compiler warning:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="33" />

The preceding code also includes our first comment. OCaml comments are
bounded by `(*` and `*)` and can be nested arbitrarily and cover multiple
lines. There's no equivalent of C++-style single-line comments that are
prefixed by `//`.

The first pattern, `first :: the_rest`, covers the case where `languages` has
at least one element, since every list except for the empty list can be
written down with one or more `::`'s. The second pattern, `[]`, matches only
the empty list. These cases are exhaustive, since every list is either empty
or has at least one element, a fact that is verified by the compiler.

#### Recursive list functions {#recursive-list-functions data-type=sect3}

Recursive functions, or functions that call themselves, are an important part
of working in OCaml or really any functional language. The typical approach
to designing a recursive function is to separate the logic into a set of
*base cases* that can be solved directly and a set of *inductive cases*,
where the function breaks the problem down into smaller pieces and then calls
itself to solve those smaller problems.[recursive functions/list
functions]{.idx}[lists/recursive list functions]{.idx}

When writing recursive list functions, this separation between the base cases
and the inductive cases is often done using pattern matching. Here's a simple
example of a function that sums the elements of a list:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="34" />

Following the common OCaml idiom, we use `hd` to refer to the head of the
list and `tl` to refer to the tail. Note that we had to use the `rec` keyword
to allow `sum` to refer to itself. As you might imagine, the base case and
inductive case are different arms of the match.

Logically, you can think of the evaluation of a simple recursive function
like `sum` almost as if it were a mathematical equation whose meaning you
were unfolding step by step:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/recursion.ml" />

This suggests a reasonable mental model for what OCaml is actually doing to
evaluate a recursive function.

We can introduce more complicated list patterns as well. Here's a function
for removing sequential duplicates:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="35" />

Again, the first arm of the match is the base case, and the second is the
inductive case. Unfortunately, this code has a problem, as indicated by the
warning message. In particular, it doesn't handle one-element lists. We can
fix this warning by adding another case to the match:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="36" />

Note that this code used another variant of the list pattern, `[hd]`, to
match a list with a single element. We can do this to match a list with any
fixed number of elements; for example, `[x;y;z]` will match any list with
exactly three elements and will bind those elements to the variables
`x`, `y`, and `z`.

In the last few examples, our list processing code involved a lot of
recursive functions. In practice, this isn't usually necessary. Most of the
time, you'll find yourself happy to use the iteration functions found in the
`List` module. But it's good to know how to use recursion for when you need
to iterate in a new way.
<a data-type="indexterm" data-startref="DSlists">&nbsp;</a>


### Options {#options data-type=sect2}

Another common data structure in OCaml is the *option*. An option is used to
express that a value might or might not be present. For
example:[options]{.idx}[data structures/options]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="37" />

The function `divide` either returns `None` if the divisor is zero, or
`Some` of the result of the division otherwise. `Some` and `None` are
constructors that let you build optional values, just as `::` and `[]` let
you build lists. You can think of an option as a specialized list that can
only have zero or one elements.

To examine the contents of an option, we use pattern matching, as we did with
tuples and lists. Let's see how this plays out in a small example. We'll
write a function that takes a filename, and returns a version of that
filename with the file extension (the part after the dot) downcased. We'll
base this on the function `String.rsplit2` to split the string based on the
rightmost period found in the string. Note that `String.rsplit2` has return
type `(string * string) option`, returning `None` when no character was found
to split on.

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="38" />

Note that we used the `^` operator for concatenating strings. The
concatenation operator is provided as part of the `Pervasives` module, which
is automatically opened in every OCaml program.

::: {data-type=note}
#### Nesting lets with let and in

A `let` paired with an `in` can be used to introduce a new binding within any
local scope, including a function body. The `in` marks the beginning of the
scope within which the new variable can be used. Thus, we could write:
[let syntax/nested let binding]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/local_let.mlt" part="0.5" />

Note that the scope of the `let` binding is terminated by the
double-semicolon, so the value of `x` is no longer available:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/local_let.mlt" part="1" />

We can also have multiple `let` statements in a row, each one adding a new
variable binding to what came before:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/local_let.mlt" part="2" />

This kind of nested `let` binding is a common way of building up a complex
expression, with each `let` naming some component, before combining them in
one final expression.
:::


Options are important because they are the standard way in OCaml to encode a
value that might not be there; there's no such thing as a
`NullPointerException` in OCaml. This is different from most other languages,
including Java and C#, where most if not all data types are *nullable*,
meaning that, whatever their type is, any given value also contains the
possibility of being a null value. In such languages, null is lurking
everywhere.[datatypes/nullable]{.idx}

In OCaml, however, missing values are explicit. A value of type
`string * string` always contains two well-defined values of type `string`.
If you want to allow, say, the first of those to be absent, then you need to
change the type to `string option * string`. As we'll see in
[Error Handling](error-handling.html#error-handling){data-type=xref}, this
explicitness allows the compiler to provide a great deal of help in making
sure you're correctly handling the possibility of missing data.


## Records and Variants {#records-and-variants data-type=sect1}

So far, we've only looked at data structures that were predefined in the
language, like lists and tuples. But OCaml also allows us to define new data
types. Here's a toy example of a data type representing a point in
two-dimensional space:[datatypes/defining new]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="41" />

`point2d` is a *record* type, which you can think of as a tuple where the
individual fields are named, rather than being defined positionally. Record
types are easy enough to construct:[records/record
types]{.idx}[datatypes/record types]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="42" />

And we can get access to the contents of these types using pattern matching:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="43" />

The pattern match here binds the variable `x_pos` to the value contained in
the `x` field, and the variable `y_pos` to the value in the `y` field.

We can write this more tersely using what's called *field punning*. In
particular, when the name of the field and the name of the variable it is
bound to coincide, we don't have to write them both down. Using this, our
magnitude function can be rewritten as follows:[fields/field punning]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="44" />

Alternatively, we can use dot notation for accessing record fields:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="45" />

And we can of course include our newly defined types as components in larger
types. Here, for example, are some types for modeling different geometric
objects that contain values of type `point2d`:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="46" />

Now, imagine that you want to combine multiple objects of these types
together as a description of a multi-object scene. You need some unified way
of representing these objects together in a single type. One way of doing
this is using a *variant* type:[datatypes/variant types]{.idx}[variant
types/combining multiple object types with]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="47" />

The `|` character separates the different cases of the variant (the first
`|` is optional), and each case has a capitalized tag, like `Circle`,
`Rect` or `Segment`, to distinguish that case from the others.

Here's how we might write a function for testing whether a point is in the
interior of some element of a list of `scene_element`s:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="48" />

You might at this point notice that the use of `match` here is reminiscent of
how we used `match` with `option` and `list`. This is no accident: `option`
and `list` are just examples of variant types that are important enough to be
defined in the standard library (and in the case of lists, to have some
special syntax).

We also made our first use of an *anonymous function* in the call to
`List.exists`. Anonymous functions are declared using the `fun` keyword, and
don't need to be explicitly named. Such functions are common in OCaml,
particularly when using iteration functions like `List.exists`.[anonymous
functions]{.idx}[functions/anonymous functions]{.idx}

The purpose of `List.exists` is to check if there are any elements of the
list in question for which the provided function evaluates to `true`. In this
case, we're using `List.exists` to check if there is a scene element within
which our point resides.

::: {data-type=note}
### `Base` and polymorphic comparison

One other thing to notice was the fact that we opened `Float.O` in the
definition of `is_inside_scene_element`. That allowed us to use the simple,
un-dotted infix operators, but more importantly it brought the float
comparison operators into scope. When using `Base`, the default comparison
operators work only on integers, and you need to explicitly choose other
comparison operators when you want them. OCaml also offers a special set of
*polymorphic comparison operators* that can work on almost any type, but
those are considered to be problematic, and so are hidden by default by
`Base`. We'll learn more about polymorphic compare in
[Terser and Faster Patterns](lists-and-patterns.html#terser-and-faster-patterns){data-type=xref}
:::


## Imperative Programming {#imperative-programming data-type=sect1}

The code we've written so far has been almost entirely *pure* or
*functional*, which roughly speaking means that the code in question doesn't
modify variables or values as part of its execution. Indeed, almost all of
the data structures we've encountered are *immutable*, meaning there's no way
in the language to modify them at all. This is a quite different style from
*imperative* programming, where computations are structured as sequences of
instructions that operate by making modifications to the state of the
program.[functional code]{.idx}[pure code]{.idx}[data
structures/immutable]{.idx}[programming/immutable vs. imperative]{.idx}

Functional code is the default in OCaml, with variable bindings and most data
structures being immutable. But OCaml also has excellent support for
imperative programming, including mutable data structures like arrays and
hash tables, and control-flow constructs like `for` and `while` loops.

### Arrays {#arrays data-type=sect2}

Perhaps the simplest mutable data structure in OCaml is the array. Arrays in
OCaml are very similar to arrays in other languages like C: indexing starts
at 0, and accessing or modifying an array element is a constant-time
operation. Arrays are more compact in terms of memory utilization than most
other data structures in OCaml, including lists. Here's an example:[data
structures/arrays]{.idx}[arrays/imperative programming and]{.idx}[imperative
programming/arrays]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="49" />

The `.(i)` syntax is used to refer to an element of an array, and the
`<-` syntax is for modification. Because the elements of the array are
counted starting at zero, element <span class="keep-together">.(2) is</span>
the third element.

The `unit` type that we see in the preceding code is interesting in that it
has only one possible value, written `()`. This means that a value of type
`unit` doesn't convey any information, and so is generally used as a
placeholder. Thus, we use `unit` for the return value of an operation like
setting a mutable field that communicates by side effect rather than by
returning a value. It's also used as the argument to functions that don't
require an input value. This is similar to the role that `void` plays in
languages like C and Java.

### Mutable Record Fields {#mutable-record-fields data-type=sect2}

The array is an important mutable data structure, but it's not the only one.
Records, which are immutable by default, can have some of their fields
explicitly declared as mutable. Here's an example of a mutable data structure
for storing a running statistical summary of a collection of
numbers.[imperative programming/mutable record fields]{.idx}[mutable record
fields]{.idx}[data structures/mutable record fields]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="50" />

The fields in `running_sum` are designed to be easy to extend incrementally,
and sufficient to compute means and standard deviations, as shown in the
following example. Note that there are two `let` bindings in a row without a
double semicolon between them. That's because the double semicolon is
required only to tell *utop* to process the input, not to separate two
declarations:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="51" />

We also need functions to create and update `running_sum`s:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="52" />

`create` returns a `running_sum` corresponding to the empty set, and
`update rsum x` changes `rsum` to reflect the addition of `x` to its set of
samples by updating the number of samples, the sum, and the sum of squares.

Note the use of single semicolons to sequence operations. When we were
working purely functionally, this wasn't necessary, but you start needing it
when you're writing imperative code.

Here's an example of `create` and `update` in action. Note that this code
uses `List.iter`, which calls the function `~f` on each element of the
provided list:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="53" />

It's worth noting that the preceding algorithm is numerically naive and has
poor precision in the presence of cancellation. You can look at this
Wikipedia
[ article on algorithms for calculating variance](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithms_for_calculating_variance)
for more details, paying particular attention to the weighted incremental and
parallel algorithms.

### Refs {#refs data-type=sect2}

We can create a single mutable value by using a `ref`. The `ref` type comes
predefined in the standard library, but there's nothing really special about
it. It's just a record type with a single mutable field called
`contents`:[records/record types]{.idx}[imperative programming/ref
type]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="54" />

There are a handful of useful functions and operators defined for `ref`s to
make them more convenient to work with:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="55" />

There's nothing magical with these operators either. You can completely
reimplement the `ref` type and all of these operators in just a few lines of
code:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="56" />

The `'a` before the `ref` indicates that the `ref` type is polymorphic, in
the same way that lists are polymorphic, meaning it can contain values of any
type. The parentheses around `!` and `:=` are needed because these are
operators, rather than ordinary functions.[parametric polymorphism]{.idx}

Even though a `ref` is just another record type, it's important because it is
the standard way of simulating the traditional mutable variables you'll find
in most languages. For example, we can sum over the elements of a list
imperatively by calling `List.iter` to call a simple function on every
element of a list, using a `ref` to accumulate the results:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="57" />

This isn't the most idiomatic way to sum up a list, but it shows how you can
use a `ref` in place of a mutable variable.

### For and While Loops {#for-and-while-loops data-type=sect2}

OCaml also supports traditional imperative control-flow constructs like
`for and while` loops. Here, for example, is some code for permuting an array
that uses a `for` loop. We use the `Random` module as our source of
randomness. `Random` starts with a default seed, but you can call
`Random.self_init` to choose a new seed at random:[Random module]{.idx}[while
loops]{.idx}[for loops]{.idx}[imperative programming/for and while
loops]{.idx}

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="58" />

From a syntactic perspective, you should note the keywords that distinguish a
`for` loop: `for`, `to`, `do`, and `done`.

Here's an example run of this code:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="59" />

OCaml also supports `while` loops, as shown in the following function for
finding the position of the first negative entry in an array. Note that
`while` (like `for`) is also a keyword:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="60" />

As a side note, the preceding code takes advantage of the fact that `&&`,
OCaml's And operator, short-circuits. In particular, in an expression of the
form *`expr1`*`&&`*`expr2`*, *`expr2`* will only be evaluated if *`expr1`*
evaluated to true. Were it not for that, then the preceding function would
result in an out-of-bounds error. Indeed, we can trigger that out-of-bounds
error by rewriting the function to avoid the short-circuiting:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/main.mlt" part="61" />

The or operator, `||`, short-circuits in a similar way to `&&`.


## A Complete Program {#a-complete-program data-type=sect1}

So far, we've played with the basic features of the language via `utop`. Now
we'll show how to create a simple standalone program. In particular, we'll
create a program that sums up a list of numbers read in from the standard
input.[programming/simple standalone example]{.idx}

Here's the code, which you can save in a file called
<em class="filename">sum.ml</em>. Note that we don't terminate expressions
with `;;` here, since it's not required outside the toplevel.

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/sum/sum.ml" />

This is our first use of OCaml's input and output routines, and we needed to
open another library, `Stdio`, to get access to them. The function
`read_and_accumulate` is a recursive function that uses
`In_channel.input_line` to read in lines one by one from the standard input,
invoking itself at each iteration with its updated accumulated sum. Note that
`input_line` returns an optional value, with `None` indicating the end of the
input stream.

After `read_and_accumulate` returns, the total needs to be printed. This is
done using the `printf` command, which provides support for type-safe format
strings, similar to what you'll find in a variety of languages. The format
string is parsed by the compiler and used to determine the number and type of
the remaining arguments that are <span class="keep-together">required</span>.
In this case, there is a single formatting directive, `%F`, so `printf`
expects one additional argument of type `float`.

### Compiling and Running {#compiling-and-running data-type=sect2}

We'll compile our program using `jbuilder`, a build system that's designed
for use with OCaml projects. First, we need to write a *jbuild* file to
specify the build.

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/sum/jbuild" />

All we need to specify is the fact that we're building an executable rather
than a library, the name of the executable, and the name of the libraries we
depend on.

We can now invoke jbuilder to build the executable. The `--dev` flag is
recommended to get better error messages during the build.

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/sum/build_sum.sh" />

The `.exe` suffix indicates that we're building a native-code executable,
which we'll discuss more in
[Files Modules And Programs](files-modules-and-programs.html#files-modules-and-programs){data-type=xref}.
Once the build completes, we can use the resulting program like any
command-line utility. We can feed input to `sum.native` by typing in a
sequence of numbers, one per line, hitting **`Ctrl-D`** when we're done:

<link rel="import" href="code/guided-tour/sum/sum.rawsh" />

More work is needed to make a really usable command-line program, including a
proper command-line parsing interface and better error handling, all of which
is covered in
[Command Line Parsing](command-line-parsing.html#command-line-parsing){data-type=xref}.


## Where to Go from Here {#where-to-go-from-here data-type=sect1}

That's it for the guided tour! There are plenty of features left and lots of
details to explain, but we hope that you now have a sense of what to expect
from OCaml, and that you'll be more comfortable reading the rest of the book
as a result.
